About communication mediums in general, but especially in enterprise
====================================================================

- uniquekey: about-communication-mediums
- date: 2010-02-16
- tags: Communication

------------------------

<p><span style="font-family:Arial;">I'd like to give my point of view about the subject of <b>communication</b> <b>mediums</b> in general, It is just a first try on this subject. I will dig <b>communication mediums in enterprise</b> through communication tooling. The goal of this post is to <b>analyse which communication medium should be used for which purpose</b>.<br></span></p><p><span style="font-family:Arial;">This post is quite general and focused on concepts (even if I am not an expert in the field), I will publish an example of what I mean with an example around tools that can implement what I explain in this post.<br></span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">Note : I do not talk about how people can change communication according to their behaviour, which is more psychology, I just talk about means, even it is sure that the way you communicate is also an important subject.</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">I think communication as <b>the main factor of success in any project in general</b>, because a project is rarely a personal one but the one of a community in general (which could be a couple, a team, a service, a department, an enterprise, and so on...). Good communication leads to more efficiency and comprehension.</span></p>

--------------------------

<p><span style="font-size:130%;"><b><span style="font-family:Arial;">A quick analysis of common communication mediums</span></b></span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">Since I am not an expert in sociology, psychology or communication mediums history, I just give a quick analysis of my understanding of what communication is becoming today.</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">Our society is called today "information society", because more and more information is exchanged between more and more people. </span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">I see several main technologies that bring us to it:</span></p>  <ul>   <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">In first days, there were just physical meeting and mail (and carrier pigeon...) </span></li>    <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">The first major discoveries that make evolve communication were radio and phone, which allow long distance communication with voice only (first unidirectional and broadcast, and then bidirectional)</span></li>    <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Then there was television that allows broadcasting a communication with voice and image </span></li>    <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">And lastly, there were computer, networks and internet that allow to communicate with voice, image, writing...and disclosed to everyone today and with many means (email, chat, community sites, twitter, blogs,...), which makes communication so important in our society</span></li> </ul>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">But if we look at the means that are used today, we can see that email has a place of choice in our communications mediums, even more in professional world. Innovation in communications mediums are mainly spread on the internet and mostly by younger people who were born with them.    <br>I think last point is a major reason why communications mediums in entreprise are so badly developed and late, since there, there is people from 20 to 70 years old. But it is time to change our use of technology in entreprise to avoid what I call "email trash for all" syndrom, i.e using your email box as the only "last generation" communications mediums (I do not take in account phone in this category), which leads to too many email boxes with hundreds emails a day...</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;font-size:130%;"><b>Some characteristics of communications mediums</b></span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">I see 3 main characteristics of communications mediums. I do not take them from reading, just from situation analysis, so it must be incomplete. They are important to define in order to analyse how to use which communications medium for which purpose:</span></p>  <ul>   <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Delay between messages of a communication </span>      <ul>       <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Synchronous: the most interactive way, quick message exchanges (ex: phone, face to face conversation)</span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Asynchronous: there is different level of latency in the exchange, from seconds (ex: chat) to months or years (ex: documents that persist...)</span></li>     </ul>   </li>    <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Basic characteristics</span>      <ul>       <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Presence: perception of people reactions and feelings, possibility to share concrete material (for example goods, paper documents or board) </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Sight: perception of some people reactions, possibility to share visual aid </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Speech: perception of some people reactions, limited expression if you have not sight </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Dynamic visual aid: people can interactively exchange through it, with two distinct types</span>          <ul>           <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Free to make any representation (text, graph, diagram, drawing...)</span></li>            <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Constrained to some representation</span></li>         </ul>       </li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Static visual aid: people can only exchange asynchronously on it</span></li>     </ul>   </li>    <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Types of organisation</span>      <ul>       <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Presentation: very directive, poor interactivity (ex: lecture...) </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Interactive presentation: restricted number of participants, directed by a leader but more interactive, self-censorship because of the group and given direction by leader (ex: committee, meeting, class...) </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Group discussion: directed by the group, even more interactive, less self-censorship since there is no imposed direction (ex: workshop, open session...) </span></li>        <li><span style="font-family:Arial;">Face to face:  (ex: with your manager, with someone of your staff, interview...)</span></li>     </ul>   </li> </ul>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">Given these definitions, I can try to explain why and how communication must not be reduced to meeting, phone and email, especially in entreprise world. Moreover, about meeting, they need more formality and simplicity.   <br></span><b>   <br><span style="font-family:Arial;">About delay between messages in a communication</span></b><span style="font-family:Arial;">, meeting and phone are good mediums for synchronous communications, but <b>email cannot be the only medium for all asynchronous communications!</b> First, because the purpose is too much different between an instant communication and an entreprise directive to be followed for example. Second, because our email boxes are exploding, and I do not believe that search and incoming email rules could be enough to bypass the problem (even if, of course, it is a good practice to use it!)</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;"><b>About basic characteristics</b>, meeting, phone and email combine all of these. However, nowadays, there are more and more distributed teams, and more and more interactions, so these three "old" mediums have to complemented. Solutions exist, just have to implement and distribute it.</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;"><b>About types of organisation</b>, there are all used more or less depending on people involved and on corporate culture. I think there is nothing really new about that. But, what is interesting is to see how they are used, for example: how is a meeting prepared? how are meeting minutes spread? how actions are tracked? And for that, I think we can win in simplicity with new mediums.</span></p>  <p><span style="font-family:Arial;">Now it's time to see how to implement these principles with real tools. I will propose this in a future post mainly around Microsoft products.</span></p>
